Update Article styling criteria and split it into formatting and writing style rules (#3734)
ppy/osu-wiki: wiki/Article_styling_criteria/Writing/en.md

- `centre` instead of `center`
- `skilful` instead of `skillful`
- `analyse` instead of `analyze`

## Capitalisation

### Article names

Article names, when written in a paragraph, must not be capitalised, unless it is a link that links to the article or it is a proper noun (e.g. BanchoBot). For example:

```markdown
The [Chat Console](/wiki/Chat_Console) is where you go to chat, using IRC (Internet Relay Chat). The chat console is located in the game client.
```

### Game modifiers

Game modifiers must have the word `mod` after the mod name to reduce ambiguity. These must be spelt as seen below (letter casing and spacing must match):

- `Easy` or `EZ`
- `No Fail` or `NF`
- `Half Time` or `HT`
- `Daycore` or `DC`
- `Hard Rock` or `HR`
- `Sudden Death` or `SD`
- `Perfect` or `PF`
- `Double Time` or `DT`
- `Nightcore` or `NC`
- `Fade In` or `FI`
- `Hidden` or `HD`
- `Flashlight` or `FL`
- `Relax` or `RL`
- `Autopilot` or `AP`
- `Target Practice` or `TP`
- `Spun Out` or `SO`
- `1K`, `2K`, `3K`, `4K`, `5K`, `6K`, `7K`, `8K`, and `9K`
  - If referring to the key mods collectively, use `xK`.
- `Co-op` or `CO`
- `Random` or `RD`
- `Auto` or `AT`
- `Cinema` or `CM`

> - `Touch Device` or `TD`

Reviewer: AFAIK, Touch Device is not a mod

Reviewer: This list is also missing some mods:
- ScoreV2
- Fade Out
- No Video
- 10K

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14264992/87100013-e8d8a980-c210-11ea-8706-24ac0baf88cc.png)

Touch Device is referring to that icon on the right. It's on the website only and I assume this is automatically applied to scores that used a touch device during play, but I'm not for sure.

---

Those other mods that you listed, except for ScoreV2, are no longer mods. I'm not sure if it would be practical to list them here. Then again, touch device is also a weird one to be on here as well...

Reviewer: It'd be nice to list the correct spelling and casing bc they are stubs in the Game Modifiers rewrite

Author: Alright, sounds good.

Touch Device stub might be worth doing.

Reviewer: May want to mention the Mirror mod for mania

- `Discord`
- `Facebook`
- `GitHub`
- `Google`
- `Reddit`
- `Skype`
- `Twitch`
- `Twitter`
- `YouTube`

Trademarks must not be followed by the trademark or registered trademark symbols.

## Date and time

### Date formatting

*For date formatting, see [Wikipedia's Manual of Style on Date formatting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Dates_and_numbers#Formats)*

Date formatting should be consistent throughout the entire article.

### Time formatting

Time formatting must be done using the following format:

```markdown
HH:MM TIMEZONE
```

Time is written in 24-hour format and any single digits must be prefixed with a zero. The timezone must be written immediately after the time and should be in UTC+0 for global events or in the timezone of the event for smaller events. Use `UTC` instead of `GMT`.

Bad examples:

```markdown
3:30 PM UTC
22:30 (UTC+7)
11:30
```

Good examples:

```markdown
15:30 UTC
22:30 UTC+7
11:30 UTC-4
```

`UTC` (without an offset) is implied to be `UTC+0`. Either one may be used, but usage must be consistent. UTC with a 0 offset must use a plus symbol (`+`).

### Date and time formatting

> When both date and time are used together, the date must be written first followed by the time. The time must be in between parenthesis (`(` and `)`). For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When both date and time are used together, the date must be written first, followed by the time. The time must be in between parenthesis (`(` and `)`). For example:
```

---

Use `e.g.` for "for example" and `i.e.` for "that is".

---

Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms should not be pluralised. For example:

```markdown
Avoid: BNs can nominate your beatmapset.

Do:    Members of the BN (Beatmap Nominators) can nominate your beatmapset.
```

## Perspective

`player`, `user`, `skinner`, `storyboarder`, and `creator` should be used when referring to the reader or another person. `they`, `them`, `their`, and `theirs` may be used when needed.

`you` and `your` should be avoided. `I` must not be used. `we`, `he` or `his`, and `she` or `her` must not be used (see above for other terms).

---

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section; however, `I` in paragraphs should be avoided.

## Syntax and grammar

Prefer using simpler syntax and grammar.

### Contractions

Contractions must not be used.

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may use contractions, usage should stay consistent throughout the entire article.

### Numbers

*For number formatting, see [Wikipedia's Manual of Style on Number formatting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style#Numbers)*

> [Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section, usage should stay consistent throughout the entire article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section, although usage should stay consistent throughout the entire article.
```

### Semicolons

> Semicolons (`;`) should not be used.

Reviewer: "Should not be used" is a lot more ambiguous than "must not be used" or "should be avoided" imo. I believe Ephemeral was trying to say that semicolons can complicate the grammar for non-natives as well confused most average readers.

Author: I'll note this for the informal register instead. Will this be fine?

The NC (Nightcore) mod is similar to the DT (Double Time) mod because both NC and DT increase the speed of the music by 50%. However, NC will change the pitch of the music and adds a clap and finish to the beat.
```

Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms must be capitalised, with exception. For example:

- `CS` for `Circle Size`
- `AR` for `Approach Rate`
- `DT` for `Double Time`
- `SBS` for `Storyboard Scripting`

---

Use `e.g.` for "for example" and `i.e.` for "that is".

---

Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms should not be pluralised. For example:

```markdown
Avoid:  BNs can nominate your beatmapset.

Prefer: Beatmap Nominators (BN) can nominate your beatmapset.
```

## Perspective

`player`, `user`, `skinner`, `storyboarder`, and `creator` should be used when referring to the reader or another person. `they`, `them`, `their`, and `theirs` may be used when needed.

`you` and `your` should be avoided. `I` must not be used. `we`, `he` or `his`, and `she` or `her` must not be used (see above for other terms).

---

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section; however, `I` in paragraphs should be avoided.

## Grammar and syntax

> Articles should prefer using simpler grammar and syntax.

Reviewer: We should specifically mention which style of punctuation ([American vs. British](https://www.thepunctuationguide.com/british-versus-american-style.html)) should be used for articles. As well as any specific changes to those styles that we make.

### Contractions

Contractions must not be used.

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may use contractions; however, usage should stay consistent throughout the entire article.

### Numbers

*For number formatting, see [Wikipedia's Manual of Style on Number formatting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style#Numbers)*

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section; however, usage should stay consistent throughout the entire article.

### Semicolons

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) should avoid using semicolons (`;`).

### Serial comma

*Note: The serial comma is also known as the "Oxford comma" or the "Harvard comma".*

The serial comma must be used.

> [Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section to help with readability.

Reviewer: Was there any discussion on this? The Oxford comma—afaik—is used to make items in lists less ambiguous and more readable. Isn't the whole point of informal registers to make it more understandable and personable?

# Writing

> *For the formatting standards, see: [Article style criteria/Formatting](../Formatting)*\
> *Notice: This article uses [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119 "IETF Tools") to describe requirement levels.*

Reviewer 2: Same as the formatting article.

```suggestion
*For the formatting standards, see: [Article style criteria/Formatting](../Formatting)*

*Notice: This article uses [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119 "IETF Tools") to describe requirement levels.*
```

- `analyse` instead of `analyze`

## Capitalisation

### Article names

Article names, when written in a paragraph, must not be capitalised, unless it is a link that links to the article or it is a proper noun (e.g. BanchoBot). The following is an example:

```markdown
The [Chat Console](/wiki/Chat_Console) is where you go to chat, using IRC (Internet Relay Chat). The chat console is located in the game client.
```

### Game modifiers

Game modifiers must have the word `mod` after the mod name to reduce ambiguity. These must be spelt as seen below (letter casing and spacing must match):

- `Easy` or `EZ`
- `No Fail` or `NF`
- `Half Time` or `HT`
- `Daycore` or `DC`
- `Hard Rock` or `HR`
- `Sudden Death` or `SD`
- `Perfect` or `PF`
- `Double Time` or `DT`
- `Nightcore` or `NC`
- `Fade In` or `FI`
- `Hidden` or `HD`
- `Flashlight` or `FL`
- `Relax` or `RL`
- `Autopilot` or `AP`
- `Target Practice` or `TP`
- `Spun Out` or `SO`
- `1K`, `2K`, `3K`, `4K`, `5K`, `6K`, `7K`, `8K`, and `9K`
  - If referring to the key mods collectively, use `xK`.
- `Co-op` or `CO`
- `Random` or `RD`
- `Mirror` or `MR`
- `Auto` or `AT`
- `Cinema` or `CM`
- `Touch Device` or `TD`
- `ScoreV2`

---

> These game modifers are no longer being used by osu!; however, if needed, these must be spelt as seen below (letter casing and spacing must match):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These game modifiers are no longer being used by osu!; however, if needed, these must be spelt as seen below (letter casing and spacing must match):
```

Bad examples:

```markdown
3:30 PM UTC
22:30 (UTC+7)
11:30
```

Good examples:

```markdown
15:30 UTC
22:30 UTC+7
11:30 UTC-4
```

`UTC` (without an offset) is implied to be `UTC+0`. Either one may be used, but usage must be consistent. UTC with a 0 offset must use a plus symbol (`+`).

### Date and time formatting

When both date and time are used together, the date must be written first, followed by the time. The time must be in between parenthesis (`(` and `)`). The following are examples:

Bad examples:

```markdown
October 25, 2016 at 11:45 UTC
October 25, 2016 11:45 UTC
```

Good example:

```markdown
October 25, 2016 (11:45 UTC)
```

## Game modes

Game modes must be written as follows:

- `osu!standard` (unofficial, but used to prevent ambiguity)
- `osu!taiko`
- `osu!catch`
- `osu!mania`

*Notice: `osu!standard` is used to maintain consistency when referring to the game mode. Folder names, however, must use `osu!` even if it is referring to the game mode.*

> Referring to the old game mode names (i.e. `Catch the Beat`, `Taiko`, and `Mania`) may be done if discussing about said game mode's previous name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Referring to the old game mode names (i.e. `Catch the Beat`, `Taiko`, and `Mania`) may be done if discussing said game mode's previous name.
```

- `approach circle`
- `game mode` (or `mode`)
- `game mod` (or `mod`)
- `gameplay`
- `hit burst`
- `hit circle`
- `hitsound`
- `in-game`
- `playstyle`
- `slider tick`
- `slider ball`
- `slider path`

---

Some words have variants. Their preferred spelling must be used and is as follows:

- `beatmap` instead of `map`.
- `creator` instead of `beatmapper` or `mapper`.
- `mapped` instead of `beatmapped`.
- `BN` or `Beatmap Nominators` when referring to the *Beatmap Nominators*.
- `sign in` instead of `log in`, unless the name of a button or link says otherwise.
- `sign out` instead of `log out`, unless the name of a button or link says otherwise.
- `register` instead of `sign up`, unless the name of a button or link says otherwise.

### Tournament articles

These words must be spelt as follows (spacing must match):

- `NoMods`, `NoMod`, or `NM`
- `FreeMods`, `FreeMod`, or `FM`
- `Tiebreaker`

## Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms

Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms must have their meaning written out upon their first occurrence. Other occurrences are optional, but done only when necessary. The following is an example:

```markdown

> The NC (Nightcore) mod is similar to the DT (Double Time) mod because both NC and DT increase the speed of the music by 50%. However, NC will change the pitch of the music and adds a clap and finish to the beat.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The NC (Nightcore) mod is similar to the DT (Double Time) mod because both NC and DT increase the speed of the music by 50%. However, NC will change the pitch of the music and add a clap and finish to the beat.
```

### Numbers

*For number formatting, see [Wikipedia's Manual of Style on Number formatting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style#Numbers)*

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section; however, usage should stay consistent throughout the entire article.

### Semicolons

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) should avoid using semicolons (`;`).

### Serial comma

*Note: The serial comma is also known as the "Oxford comma" or the "Harvard comma".*

The serial comma must be used.

### Logical quotations

Refer to [Wikipedia's Manual of Style for logical quotations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style#Punctuation_inside_or_outside "Wikipedia").

From Wikipedia's Manual of Style:

> Include terminal punctuation within the quotation marks only if it was present in the original material, and otherwise place it after the closing quotation mark. For the most part, this means treating periods and commas in the same way as question marks: keep them inside the quotation marks if they apply only to the quoted material and outside if they apply to the whole sentence.

> ## Pronouncation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Pronunciation
```

> Written pronouncations must use the [International Phonetic Alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:IPA/English "Wikipedia").

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Written pronunciations must use the [International Phonetic Alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:IPA/English "Wikipedia").
```

# Writing

*For the formatting standards, see: [Article style criteria/Formatting](../Formatting)*

*Notice: This article uses [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119 "IETF Tools") to describe requirement levels.*

All English articles must use plain English.

## Language register

There are two language registers on the wiki: neutral and informal.

The neutral register is the default on the wiki.

The informal register is special and given to a small handful of articles. Some examples with this register include [FAQ](/wiki/FAQ) and [Help Centre](/wiki/Help_Centre).

For both registers, all rules in this part of the article style criteria must be followed. Exceptions for either register will be noted.

## British English

British English spelling variants must be used when there are conflicting spellings of English words. For example, use:

- `colour` instead of `color`
- `centre` instead of `center`
- `skilful` instead of `skillful`
- `analyse` instead of `analyze`

## Capitalisation

### Article names

> Article names, when written in a paragraph, must not be capitalised, unless it is a link that links to the article or it is a proper noun (e.g. BanchoBot). The following is an example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Article names, when written in a paragraph, must not be capitalised, unless it is a link that points to the article or it is a proper noun (e.g. BanchoBot). The following is an example:
```

- `Fade Out`
- `No Video`
- `10K`
- `Taiko`

---

When writing out game modifiers for tournament articles, they must instead use upper camel case (omit the space and keep the letter casing as seen above).

### Gameplay elements

Gameplay elements must not be capitalised, unless it is a link that links to the article. The following is an example:

```markdown
In osu!standard, beatmaps are composed of three different gameplay elements: hit circles, sliders, and spinners.
```

### Language names

Language names must be capitalised. The following is an example:

```markdown
The `#spanish` chat channel is for those who speak Spanish.
```

### Proper nouns

Proper nouns must be capitalised. The following is an example:

```markdown
Dean Herbert (also known as peppy) created osu! back in 2007.
```

### Trademarks

*For rules regarding osu!, see: [osu!](#osu!)*

The following trademarks must be spelt as follows (letter casing must match):

- `Discord`
- `Facebook`
- `GitHub`
- `Google`
- `Reddit`
- `Skype`
- `Twitch`
- `Twitter`
- `YouTube`

Trademarks must not be followed by the trademark or registered trademark symbols.

## Date and time

### Date formatting

> *For date formatting, see [Wikipedia's Manual of Style on Date formatting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Dates_and_numbers#Formats)*

Reviewer 3: while it's a good reference, it's completely useless in the sense it gives you zero information on what format should be chosen, or is preferable. is it 2020-01-01, or Jan 1st, 2020, or 1 Jan 2020?

Author: Could have probably phrased it better... To answer, there is actually no single preferred format for dates currently. The ones you listed are all acceptable. Though, I believe that the `2020-01-01` format should only be used in tables, while the other two should be used in paragraphs while probably keeping it consistent within the article.

I did define a date format in the earlier versions of ASC, but when I was updating the date formatting section a few PR's ago, clayton (or Joehuu?) suggested to link to that Wikipedia MoS section to keep it simple.

Reviewer 3: even outlining one of these formats as a preferable one is already a start

Author: Maybe this if we're going to stick with it?
```suggestion
The formats found in [Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Dates and numbers § Formats](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Dates_and_numbers#Formats "Wikipedia") are all accepted date formats.
```

Reviewer 3: yeah, that works

Reviewer 4: when writing new stuff i prefer 1 Jan 2020 because i thought that was the british english way to do it. might be pulling that out of my ass though cuz i barely know the difference between american and british english beyond coloUr

Date formatting should be consistent throughout the entire article.

### Time formatting

Time formatting must be done using the following format:

```markdown
HH:MM TIMEZONE
```

Time is written in 24-hour format and any single digits must be prefixed with a zero. The timezone must be written immediately after the time and should be in UTC+0 for global events or in the timezone of the event for smaller events. Use `UTC` instead of `GMT`.

Bad examples:

```markdown
3:30 PM UTC
22:30 (UTC+7)
11:30
```

Good examples:

```markdown
15:30 UTC
22:30 UTC+7
11:30 UTC-4
```

> `UTC` (without an offset) is implied to be `UTC+0`. Either one may be used, but usage must be consistent. UTC with a 0 offset must use a plus symbol (`+`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`UTC` (without an offset) is implied to be `UTC+0`. Either one may be used, but usage must be consistent. UTC with an explicit 0 offset must use a plus symbol (`+`).
```

### Date and time formatting

> When both date and time are used together, the date must be written first, followed by the time. The time must be in between parenthesis (`(` and `)`). The following are examples:

Reviewer 3: 's obvious
```suggestion
When both date and time are used together, the date must be written first, followed by the time. The time must be in between parenthesis (`(` and `)`).
```

Bad examples:

```markdown
October 25, 2016 at 11:45 UTC
October 25, 2016 11:45 UTC
```

Good example:

```markdown
October 25, 2016 (11:45 UTC)
```

## Game modes

Game modes must be written as follows:

- `osu!standard` (unofficial, but used to prevent ambiguity)
- `osu!taiko`
- `osu!catch`
- `osu!mania`

> *Notice: `osu!standard` is used to maintain consistency when referring to the game mode. Folder names, however, must use `osu!` even if it is referring to the game mode.*

Reviewer 3: I think it's a note, not notice

Author: `Note` in the ASC is intended to point out some trivial information. Though, I have been seeing some signs that this does not make much sense, is sometimes confusing, and may depend on who is writing/reading it.

I guess I'm now leaning towards removing `Notice` in favor of `Note`, or change `Note` to `Trivia` and `Notice` to `Note` though I think this should be discussed with a few others first.

Reviewer 3: to me, "Trivia" is equally as meaningless as "Notice" and could be covered by just "Note", but that's for another PR to not keep this one hanging for any longer

Referring to the old game mode names (i.e. `Catch the Beat`, `Taiko`, and `Mania`) may be done if discussing said game mode's previous name.

> ---

Reviewer 3: think it serves no real purpose here

Articles such as the [Ranking Criteria](/wiki/Ranking_Criteria) may use `osu!` instead of `osu!standard`.

## osu!

The name of the game, osu!, must not be capitalised or italicised. The osu! official branding must not use any spaces. Examples include:

- `osu!academy`
- `osu!api`
- `osu!catch`
- `osu!direct`
- `osu!keyboard`
- `osu!mania`
- `osu!store`
- `osu!stream`
- `osu!supporter`
- `osu!tablet`
- `osu!taiko`
- `osu!talk`
- `osu!tourney`

> Other brandings that are not covered by the osu! official branding must use a space. Examples include:

Reviewer 3: I think it may be described better if you also point out that `osu!` here is a [qualifying noun](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noun_adjunct) (which should be separated by a space from the noun it modifies), and not a part of some specific term like *`osu!`supporter*

- `osu! tournaments`
- `osu! community`
- `osu! chat`
- `osu! client`
- `osu! wiki`

User titles that include `osu!` as part of the title name must be capitalised. Examples include:

- `osu! Alumni`
- `osu! Champion`

---

> `osu!` should not end the sentence. If it does however, use a full stop (`.`) (or question mark (`?`), if appropriate) to get `osu!.` (or `osu!?`).

Reviewer 3: too many parenthesis, I think it can be rephrased without loss of meaning

- `register` instead of `sign up`, unless the name of a button or link says otherwise.

### Tournament articles

These words must be spelt as follows (spacing must match):

- `NoMods`, `NoMod`, or `NM`
- `FreeMods`, `FreeMod`, or `FM`
- `Tiebreaker`

## Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms

Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms must have their meaning written out upon their first occurrence. Other occurrences are optional, but done only when necessary. The following is an example:

```markdown
The NC (Nightcore) mod is similar to the DT (Double Time) mod because both NC and DT increase the speed of the music by 50%. However, NC will change the pitch of the music and add a clap and finish to the beat.
```

Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms must be capitalised, with exception. The following are examples:

- `CS` for `Circle Size`
- `AR` for `Approach Rate`
- `DT` for `Double Time`
- `SBS` for `Storyboard Scripting`

---

Use `e.g.` for "for example" and `i.e.` for "that is".

---

Abbreviations, acronyms, and initialisms should not be pluralised. The following is an example:

```markdown
Avoid:  BNs can nominate your beatmapset.

> Prefer: Beatmap Nominators (BN) can nominate your beatmapset.

Reviewer 3: does the order matter here? I assume it doesn't, otherwise the example contradicts with the previous one, *The NC (Nightcore) mod ... .*

Author: I don't think it does, but I'll change it to match the previous. This may be something that'll need some discussion.

Author: My mistake, I flipped it to let Beatmap Nominators be plural to avoid having the initialism being plural. I'll just change the example to omit it instead.

```

## Perspective

`player`, `user`, `skinner`, `storyboarder`, and `creator` should be used when referring to the reader or another person. `they`, `them`, `their`, and `theirs` may be used when needed.

`you` and `your` should be avoided. `I` must not be used. `we`, `he` or `his`, and `she` or `her` must not be used (see above for other terms).

---

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section; however, `I` in paragraphs should be avoided.

## Grammar and syntax

> Articles should prefer using simpler American grammar and syntax.

Reviewer 3: uhh, at this point I personally am lost, could you add an example? to me, the way ASC suggests using British English spelling, but American grammar and syntax is confusing

Author: It was based on this review comment <https://github.com/ppy/osu-wiki/pull/3734#discussion_r471580420>, which links to <https://www.thepunctuationguide.com/british-versus-american-style.html>.

Reviewer 3: that's a bit better, could you please link it?

### Contractions

Contractions must not be used.

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may use contractions; however, usage should stay consistent throughout the entire article.

### Numbers

*For number formatting, see [Wikipedia's Manual of Style on Number formatting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style#Numbers)*

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) may ignore this section; however, usage should stay consistent throughout the entire article.

### Semicolons

[Articles with informal registers](#language-register) should avoid using semicolons (`;`).

### Serial comma

> *Note: The serial comma is also known as the "Oxford comma" or the "Harvard comma".*
> 
> The serial comma must be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The serial comma, also known as the Oxford comman, must be used.
```
